Hello, welcome to the 14th webcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group from Padmasamy Ling,
Venerable Kemperomichhe's monastery in Sydney Center, New York. Today we'll be
discussing chapter 14 of the Kemperomichhe's book, "The Buddhist Path," and the title of
the chapter is called "Shamatha and Vipassana." So we'll begin with our usual
opening prayers, and then we'll go into the discussion. Thanks so much for joining.
[Music]
Pemakkara, the 25th king subjects, sozorna, yamda, the hundred churchons, and others,
lamasa, the kamma, and tourmalineages to you, I pray. The supreme tradition of the
glorious Buddha, Padmasambhava, which is the essential, extraordinary view and
doctrine of the early translation school, you keep alive and spread by the light
of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great tempo, I pray it shall ode his feet. In the palace
of the old man, Darmadattu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the
one who shows clearly the dharmakÄya of my own mind, we pray to the honorable
root guru, glorious root teacher, precious one, dwelling on the lotus seed on the
crown of my head, hold me with your great kindness, bestow the accomplishments
of body, speech, and mind.
So chapter 24 of Shammata and Vipassana begins on page 71 in the Buddha's Path,
and I'll give a quick summary of the first half of the chapter according to the
Kavirimaches. The Vibhiches begin by saying that all the different meditation
instructions given by the Buddha have one purpose, to reveal the true nature of
the mind. Which meditation instruction works for oneself depends on one's own
mind at that time, but all the instructions work together to help us
continue on the path until we reach enlightenment. When we first begin to
meditate, most people find it difficult to rest the mind so his primordial wisdom
can shine through. The mind is restless and constantly moving. First we sit with
a good posture and remain focused. Although the Buddha taught several
techniques for calming our grasping mind and revealing its wisdom nature, two of
the best known are Shammata and Vipassana. Shammata or calm abiding is a meditation
technique we apply to maintain our mind in a constant, unchanging state of focus.
Keeping the mind still and alert allows the natural clarity of the mind to shine
forth. However, most of the time our minds are moving wild like a hurricane which
isn't calming and oftentimes causes the body and speech to create a lot of
conflict. Although it is difficult to calm the mind, it is possible with joyful
effort and courage. Everything in Dharma and life requires perseverance and
follow-through. It is important for us to believe we can achieve this goal and then
to work towards it until it is accomplished with steady continual
effort and enlightenment as possible. There are many stages of mental
development and calm, but whenever we can maintain a focused awareness, for that
moment the mind is calm and peaceful. This relaxes our body which relaxes our
mind even more. To practice Shammata calm abiding, begin by sitting in the seven
point posture of Buddha Vairachana or at least have your back very straight. Keep
your breathing normal. There are two types of Shammata practice, Shammata
with an object to focus and Shammata without an object to focus. Shammata
with an object involves focusing on a physical object like a statue or
crystal or visualizing an object like a sphere or a syllable. You can also follow
your breath maintaining awareness of inhalation and exhalation as they happen.
When your mind wanders, bring it back to the object of your focus. Shammata
without an object has no particular focus. It is just meditating on emptiness.
Here we'll go to the first topic question. When first learning to meditate, most
people find it difficult to rest the mind so that the primordial wisdom can
shine through. Thoughts continuously arise one after another like waves on
the ocean and the mind is constantly moving. It helps to begin by sitting with
good posture and then to remain focused. There are several techniques in the
Buddhist tradition for settling the mind and uncovering wisdom. Two of the best
known are Shammata and Deepasyana. Sanskrit word Shammata is made of two
words Shama and Ta. Shama means peaceful or calm and Ta means letting or abiding.
So Shammata means letting the mind be peaceful. Shammata is also known in
Sanskrit as Samadhi which is also two words put together.
Sama means motionless and D means holding. So Samadhi refers to maintaining
one's mind in a constant unchanging state. For example, if you fill a bowl with water
and do not touch it, the water does not move. It stays still. Similarly, when your
mind rests single-pointedly undisturbed by thoughts, it becomes calm. In this state
the mind is concentrated and focused. This means that the mind does not move or
change. It is solid like a mountain. Maintaining the mind in a state of
stillness results in clarity of the natural mind shining forth. That's from
page 71, second and third paragraphs.
I had a thought kind of around the Shammata which was I was just wondering
what people thought about kind of a calm peaceful mind is so nice to have but
then also I know for myself sometimes I have a nice calm peaceful state of mind
that maybe isn't so much Shammata. So like I don't know just thought if we all
just thought a little bit about it by kind of distinguishing how just how a
peaceful calm mind relates to Shammata and how how Shammata brings us a step
a step further. I'm not sure exactly how to phrase my question but just kind of
like what's the difference between just being nice and relaxed and calm and
Shammata meditation.
I think within that holding or like that focusing of the mind brings sort of a
more of a clarity rather than just kind of like oh it feels good. Yeah in that degree of
concentration aspect too. There's a certain it's just interesting how it's
kind of so natural we can relax but then also like you said there's that dullness
aspect but then that relaxing but then that other aspect of Shammata
concentrating. I mean I think there's a big distinction between relaxing in our
habitual patterns or relaxing according to like our grasping minds with all of
its preferences and then versus like relaxing into this natural state of
awareness or non grasping mind and similarly with Shammata we can focus or
fixate according to our habits on all kinds of pleasurable things. Usually when
we feel relaxed we're definitely holding on to or running after a pleasurable
object that will cause us to feel relaxed. But with Shammata as a meditation
technique taught by the Buddha we're seeing that in the present moment we're
holding on to an object that's actually going to help us lessen the turbulence
of our surface level mind of all of its strong emotions and thoughts. So in one
case like the more feel good kind of or concentrating kind of under pressure
usually that's really related with just habitual mind just our our common way of
understanding things and of really kind of obsessing on things that we prefer
versus like seeing through the habitual mind and anchoring our awareness on an
object with the intention of like actually stilling the turbulence of our
habits so they can become more refined so that then our non habituated wisdom
awareness or non grasping mind becomes more apparent or shines through more
clearly one thing to just think of it is the term relaxing you know a lot of time
that I've spent with different people doing body work they this they really
kind of hammer home that difference between what's relaxing and what's
releasing because relaxing can be you know you know you kind of like just
plop your body and just let everything go whereas releasing is you know very
specific about your letting go of certain things you know in this case I
think it's more you know echoing what droplets and you're gonna you you aren't
completely relaxing the body in Shama tell you you're keeping this posture so
that way you can release a lot of that grasping and that clinging you know so
just just that subtle word shift over into what exactly are you releasing and
then you know exactly this droplets that you know we're looking at it's still in
the mind you know for the purpose of you know what's our goal you know that that
bodhichitta that refuge you know that that motivation so releasing anything
else
I think to the the relaxing aspect depending on how it is can be more
actually like the possum of I mean I know we haven't really talked about that
so much yet but like mutual kenrimic a one time he said his first experiences
of like the nature of mind was when he was like a sheep herder and just like
looking up at the sky you know like totally relaxed but open and you know
but anyway it's just that I think there's a difference between like relaxed
like daydreaming and kind of just like what everybody's saying normal habit
patterns and yeah and yet and then that kind of concentration where you really
recognize when your mind has wandered from the object and you bring it back to
the object that you're you know and you keep bringing it back to the object that
you're focusing on I mean I think a big a big point to say with this is that this
is we're all responding and like saying well what is shamatha now according to
the buddha's teachings and then roommates are really clear is that a
shamatha practices or concentration practices existed long before the Buddha
came into this world I mean there's many many kinds of concentration practices I
mean in a more worldly sense like if we look at that those terms on the back of
this study God there's the three types of concentration the first is worldly
concentration which is just developing a capacity to remain focused on an object
over a period of time and that could be something like hunting or it could be
something like watching TV for six hours straight or being angry we did not have
an object of anger in mind for a long time it's like any like concentration is
saying irregardless of what the object is or what it cultivates in your mind
like there's all kinds of we it's like a culture of concentrated activity in a
way our mind is kind of jumping a lot too but it's just to say that this
shamatha techniques are non-liberative techniques of meditation that don't
necessarily lead to enlightenment this like these concentration techniques
existed long before the Buddha was around and they can lead to more
temporary states of peace it says in that definition the concentration worldly
concentration leads to a temporary state of peace because I think it stays in the
habitual type of like habitual it works with our own habits it's not uncovering
their deeper nature or refining them to be less turbulent but so we're all it's
all and we're answering this question in the context of the Buddha's teachings of
what is shamatha and a path of like enlightenment as being the final goal
for ourselves and others it's a good point to make that distinction also from
a practical perspective you can't hunt for long enough at a time to achieve
full shamatha or you can't do some other activity that people might consider to
be sort of relaxing generally you couldn't do it for long enough to for a
length of time you need to meditate to get your mother
and that's a time wise one of the renowned measures of shamatha is five
minutes one of the renowned like kind of big milestones if you can hold your
object for five minutes without wavering on any other thought that's a that's
then you're starting to get pretty good so that's that's kind of a good you know
because that rolls out a lot of a lot of things just as far as you know the goal
is like really to place it and it's your mind and it stays on whatever you place
it on that shanata with focus and I thought to mention too that one of the
most renowned ones too like you made the distinction between shanata as like a
normal worldly technique in shanata and Buddhism but sometimes I forget exactly
what they call it but oftentimes an object of shamatha is like the Buddha's
face or an actual statue yeah the third eye spot of the Buddha and that's
considered that's really a renowned aspect of you know the shamatha in Buddhism when you
have a holy object of the Dharma that you focus your attention on as opposed
to a rock or a flame with a breath or whatever I forget exactly what that's
called it's interesting to it reminds me of a teaching I was once hearing where
the particular teacher was talking about you know he was talking more about
aspects of the mind and saying you know kind of you know how fast it is and you
know how if you have like a piece of metal and you've turned it into like an
ashtray you know you're not you're not showing a lot of respect to it let's say
you took that metal and made a statue of the Buddha you know for for you know
other beings to kind of come and venerate you know that you're putting that that
material to the with this beautiful intention and filling it with this
beautiful intention and kind of doing it it seems almost the same way with the
shamatha you could you or maybe more so the focus you know you could focus on
something you know it could be something like an ashtray and that focus is a
disrespectful focus you're taking something that you no longer want and
kind of flicking it into it or you using your focus in a way that that that brings
those beautiful qualities that you know brings the you know people to have that
that piece around you and things like that you know in that same way it's you
know what's the what's the intention you're imbuing into your focus is another
way of distinguishing and just that ability I think like you were
mentioning that's such a major step and to have that stability of mind where
we're not getting distracted or we can settle our mind on one object to focus in
a in an open relaxed manner you know and then just as a foundation for all for
looking deeper into you know maybe into the repulsion and things or like you
know I mean River Shays mentioned this in the chapter too but the whole reason
calm abiding it also it's kind of implying that we're just doing the
opposite most of the time so just kind of that or like the metaphors to of like
taming a wild horse you know like when you get the wild horse and you stake it
you know to a spot you know just that it's such a major movement for us to
actually I mean of course when we try to do it we see but then it is possible
yeah similar point I wanted to just highlight on page 73 in the middle
paragraph there's just this nice really kind of short short example of the
courageous effort that is so important when we're particularly I mean
particularly I think when we're beginning to meditate and just kind of
seeing how like the movements of the mind and the bumpiness and kind of maybe
that maybe that tendency to think oh I'm never gonna be able to do this so like
how can I possibly meditate and then so they're really talking about like the
importance of patience and courage and joyful effort and just continuing and
that you know recognizing the importance of it and that it's that it is possible
you know so they give this example of a mountain and that you know a bodhisattva
told some some people that if they really tried they could just totally
take down this mountain and reach enlightenment and so some people maybe
tried a little bit and I said this is impossible and gave up and then some
other people really worked for a long time and just kept going and doing it
and doing it and then they did achieve enlightenment so anyway I mean it's it's
a you know that metaphor of a mountain taking down a mountain I mean it's a it's a
big it's a big task so I mean we have all of our I mean speaking for myself you
know many like so many individual patterns and like chronic tendencies for
so long that it may seem really difficult in the beginning but like just
like really trusting and having that joyful effort and like you know this is
really good something really important and seeing that value and moving forward
is really so so important and again it kind of in each session session too we're
kind of where we're looking at this one chapter but it's also all in this whole
book and you know that aspect too of our practice we're kind of in a way our
conversations been going maybe a little bit more around the mind element to
Shimata because of course that's that's the queen beer but uh but then these
other things like we've gone over those five supports of for our meditation and
then the winds and channels I mean just setting up all those conditions as well
as the view that's introduced early in the book just how all of those things
are taking place here I wanted to also mention with Shimata is that it is about
staying presently aware in what's happening right now there's a lot of
type of focuses where you zone out and you're like one pointedly zoned out and
that Shimata is about being able to intentionally place the awareness as
you're saying Andrew and hold it there freshly presently vibrantly there for
as long as you want and then the overall point of the shamata at least in Buddhist
according to Buddhist teaching is so that we can and it doesn't mean so that
we can just keep our mind fixated on something for years and just not have to
deal with all the trouble in the world because we can kind of just only pay
attention to this one thing but it's about developing that ability to
intentionally place our awareness and really penetrate in and see something
really thoroughly without our mind just having to just jump away and be
distracted like so it's developing that capacity to intentionally place the
awareness and then all problem-solving in all aspects of life or dealing with
relationality relationships we have that capacity that we can then apply in these
different circumstances and be more thorough more complete and how we're
engaging with what's happening question I had is I know for many people it's
beneficial to do things like walking meditation mostly because it's a way of
including it into like a way of going about your day you know as you're doing
things as you're as you're going different places you know walking
meditation is is something you can just say okay you know from you know I'm
going to this next meeting but you know for all that space in between you know
I'm allowing myself to just walk is is that a form of shamata or is there a way
that shamata could be used throughout a day you know and you know in that in
that way where it's just simply coming back to the breath for a little bit of
time in in viewing our life of mindfulness or is it more distinct it
means more structure
maybe both okay holding an object in mind mindfulness is you're not
necessarily holding an object in mind you're aware of what your mind is doing
so it's kind of - shamata is a technique you're intentionally applying and
mindfulness is awareness of what the technique is and am I applying it
correctly right now or what am I doing right now the mindfulness but there's
all kinds of objects like Zen koans if people try to hold that one koan in mind
all day long even while they sleep like that's it is like a shamata style that
breaks through into Vipassana seeing the nature of what is the inconceivable
meaning of the koan breaking through the non dual mind but so that is a type of
holding anytime where we have a good intention holding something in mind kind
of trying to release our grasping then that's a shamata in the sense of Buddhist
practice so even like if we say for people on our traditions we were just
reflecting on sakes another piece of wisdom that sacred crochet you know
advised us on and then holding that wisdom throughout the day would that be
a form of shamata that you know would think so usually people are still when
they do shamata as a practice okay I think to distinguish between mindfulness
and awareness and alertness it's yeah it's related we should probably go to
this next Vipassana section but it's related with the different levels of the
teaching they both they use shamata and Vipassana in basic Buddhism and in
Mahayana and in Vajrayana and they mean different things the definitions of them
and the techniques you use are different but so there's an overarching you're
holding an object that's a shamata thing you're releasing your holding and you're
just relaxing your body that's the Vipassana side but it's different in
each level of the Buddhist teaching so real quickly just our times going by a
little bit I'll summarize the second half of the book which is more related
with the Vipassana meditation teachings the kamurimchas they say the second
meditation technique is called Vipassana or supreme seeing where you examine your
mind where the mind itself examines itself and its source to practice
Vipassana you also sit with good posture and normal breathing then look directly
to the mind itself when thoughts and emotions appear look for where they come
from and where they go the instant the mind looks to itself the nature of mind
is revealed then simply relax in this nature effortlessly confidently knowing
there is nothing to gain or lose the true nature of mind itself is already
present and cannot be changed maintain your awareness in its natural state and
all the divisions we create by grasping on the thoughts dissolve integrate
equanimity this nature completely pervades your mind and everything you
experience Vipassana penetrates the surface level of mind where we grasp on
to thoughts and directly sees the insubstantiality of all outer objects
and inner experiences we see that all distinctions between subject and object
are ultimately empty of true existence Shyamata is the basis of Vipassana
the Vipassana goes beyond Shyamata since it transcends all duality Vipassana
leads to liberation when we maintain awareness of the natural state that is
effortless Shyamata the union of Shyamata and Vipassana those two
techniques of Shyamata and Vipassana are taught both in the sutriyana and
Vatriyana teachings of the Buddha though they're more related to sutriyana which
includes basic Buddhism and Mahayana Vatriyana includes the sutriyana and is
the complete teaching of the Buddha in Vatriyana Shyamata is taught as creation
stage visualization and Vipassana is taught as completion stage dissolution
where everything is seen to arise from abide within and return to the nature of
the mind
so the second quote is from page 74 the first full paragraph and page 75 the
second full paragraph the second type of meditation is called Vipassana
Vipassana is a Sanskrit word made up of V meaning extraordinary and Pashana
meaning seeing literally it means extraordinary seeing but it is usually
translated into English as insight or supreme seeing Vipassana goes further
than maintaining the calm and unmoving mind in Vipassana practice you examine
the mind and its source by penetrating the surface level of thoughts and
emotions you see that their insubstantiality is the true nature of
the mind this is the practice of extraordinary seeing in which you realize
that everything arises from great emptiness and that the true nature of
the mind is unborn unceasing and free from concepts when the mind relaxes in
its natural state all of the usual perceptions of solid existence are
experienced as nothing more than a dream this is the great equanimity free from
mental fabrications by Shimada one maintains the mind in the natural state
and by Vipassana one sees that all appearances are insubstantial emptiness
success with one of these practices supports the development of the other
but the result of Vipassana meditation is greater than that of Shimada
so what's the main difference between Shammata and Vipassana?
what is holding in one's not holding?
can you say more?
Shammata you try to hold an object, Vipassana you don't hold an object?
you looked at who's holding it seems like maybe with Vipassana it's looking
more of course they kind of ventured here like for example thinking about
thoughts looking at the nature of that thought well where did it come from where
is it now or where the mind itself like where is the mind whereas Shammata
maybe we've gained some stability and everything's kind of in a natural flow
and peace and everything and there's that stability and clarity of mind and
able to focus but then maybe that object in a way and that was a question I had
but I won't jump the gun a little bit but the way mind mind in a way is looking
back at itself or the essence you know the essence of all these appearances
that are shining forth just and maybe really tangibly seeing how it is
insubstantial whether it's through an intellect and logic or like a more direct meditative
experience
so it is letting go but there's that vivid quality too it seems
I think almost in like a basic Buddhism the in Mahayana too so all Sutra Mahayana
is the sense of a subject holding an object for in Shammata and as it's
talked about in those traditions in Sutra Anna there's a me sense of self
holding an object sense of not-self and the technique is the Shammata technique
is always in that framework even if it's a more subtle object and still within
the sense of a subject apprehending an object and the passion aspect is is
seeing before the mind filters or the before the mind holds itself into a
subject object framework or a duality mind before that happens or when that
happens then you apply one of these Vipassana techniques which say okay this
is arising a thought or an object or whatever and you look the mind looks at
where is that thought where is that object where is this mind and Ravish is
it really clear to say that Vipassana isn't a contemplative intellectual
investigation or analysis in Buddhism there's those three types of wisdom you
hear the teaching you contemplate the teaching and then you apply the teaching
and with meditation so and so then you come to see the nature of relative and
absolute truth directly without intellectual mind so here Vipassana is
very clearly this third level of wisdom this direct experience of how your mind
is before the mind filters into a subject object type of awareness so once
it's in that type of duality framework then the mind looks back to itself and
then right after it looks back to itself you release the looking the holding so
because if we just investigate investigate then it's shamatha or it's a
contemplative type of wisdom it's still within duality mind but this Vipassana
that's really clearly Vipassana was an extraordinary teaching of the Buddha and
it's actually what didn't exist at the time before the Buddha came and that was
the complete path shamatha and Vipassana together and it's the Vipassana part
this liberative it sees the nature of the perceiver of the grasp of the holding
and releases that entirely. I had a quick question just practically with in terms of
like a beginner possibly starting out is it possible like say they read this
chapter and they're thinking about how do I start practicing this is it can you
just start with Vipassana or is it like always do you always have to start with
shamatha I mean you know I asked that question too from in the chapter there's
they say the technique for the Vipassana begins the same as with shamatha with
good sitting posture and normal breathing and then you look into the
mind itself so it's almost it's almost like you just jump into the technique
I'm wondering if that's recommended or okay or depending on the practitioner just
like a very profound like essential sutra on the teaching of the three
trainings Sheila Samadhi rajna we there's a whole chapter we went over on
this ethics concentration wisdom it's always it's always taught in that
sequence in the sutra on the teachings first you have to get your outer conduct
well then you start to look in the mind in the mind which is still grasping mind
starts to get more stable and calm with a concentration technique and then once
it's more calm and stable then that concentrator the looker the awareness
looks at itself with wisdom so that's the Vipassana side a ripassana or
Vipassana but in Tantrayana or in the in Vajrayana teachings of the Buddha they
always talk about shamatha and Vipassana as a union so and this is a big
difference like here at the very end said how concentration is usually talked
about as creation stage and Vajrayana and then Vipassana is usually talked
about a completion stage and then when we approach them as a unity then that's
called zochen or great completion stage so it's like a lot of concepts saying
here but it's a difference is in the sutra ona where you go from duality mind
and then we kind of try to penetrate into egolessness selfless awareness but
in Vajrayana we start by trying to see the Nanda wisdom awareness or the of the
three samadhi's the first samadhi the suchness samadhi we start by trying to
recognize emptiness right off the bat and then we try to naturally sustain
that recognition when that's the shamatha side the shamatha side is just
sustaining the effortless sustaining of our awareness of the true nature but we
first see the true nature yeah and so that scene like within that larger
framework of the Buddhist teaching there's nine yana teachings the top six
yanas are all Vajrayana they're always based on sutra anna so even that way is
a gradual approach where we have to develop sutra anna first and then enter
into Vajrayana and as it's more traditionally taught like we would
definitely have put in a lot of time in sutra anna practices before getting into
Vajrayana but they say to the nature is though I mean just the Rinpoche saying
the chapter the nature is what it is it's already there right now we can see
it and like they give teachings public teachings where anyone can come and get
these instructions but in terms of really developing through that as it says
here it takes time and like so even if we have these direct pointing out
instructions then to actually apply them in a way where we can sustain that as a
meditation practice takes a lot of time and a lot of obstacles come up and
because all our grasping has to be released so either way is for almost
everyone have to be a gradual approach have to have a solid foundation then we
build release everything and I thought on a related point with that if you just
have shavata and novapasa man it's a small point but you could read you could
even strengthen your ego in your sense of grasping even more and they said that
happened a lot many people would get really good at
shavata and spend long time on that but then when they come out of retreat that
even more egoic and the strong than before because they didn't have the
vipassana aspect of turning back on the mind itself and see the insubstantiality
aspect so they just solidified the mind as being very sharp but it was a egoic
and then we also have that bodhicitta I mean that aspect of Mahayana too of bodhicitta where we are
thinking not only ourselves but all beings and equally with that becoming more and more familiar
with the emptiness of everything
and I think another way to do the to talk about the distinction between shavata and
vipassana or this concentration and insight is with shavata we're really holding
an object at the exclusion of all the other things happening whether it's one
object a small object and imagined object a set of objects we're holding a
set of something and we're not paying attention at all to all the other stuff
going on in the world and around us so it excludes all of these things whereas
vipassana can be talked about talked about as as actually investigating the
relationality of the holder and the holding like you you're not you're
trying to expand the sense of relationality of the and so it comes more
to the flexibility of mind not just an ability to stay frozen or stay fixed but
to actually see the relationality between objects including the one who's
aware of the objects and so it gets into that emptiness is the definition of
dependent origination that it's all relational emptiness can be said to be
just utter relationality like the realization of utter relationality and
if we're applying a technique where we don't see the relationality between
things or only looking at a small set of relationality me and that then it's a
big difference between shavata and vipassana
so it's good to say this is a big topic all the meditation instructions of
Buddha Shakyamuni fit into shammata and vipassana all the levels of the
teaching fit into those instructions we just have a short period of time to talk
about these but even I mean even at the love beyond about Rihanna Zochen has its
own way of talking about shavata and vipassana or their union and if you look
at like heberimache's books like they're pointing out the nature of mind their
books they talk about all these different levels of instruction and
they say one level is there's a effortless union of shavata and
vipassana at a more gross level we make the division between the two and we have
to feel like we have to like combine them at an even more gross level we
might not even think that vipassana is true what do you mean it's all true
nature balanced perfect already so we really have to anchor into shavata first
but it just really depends on what our mind is there's all these techniques
that really talk about how shavata and vipassana fit together differently but it's
just I wanted to emphasize we didn't exhaust this topic by any means this is
like so profound and the best way is to actually practice it I mean this but
that aspect to help you in the book I mean that we've given so much of the
view but like how special it is when we actually with our own minds sit down and
like remember as much as we can of the teachings after having thought about
them understood and really applied in meditation on whatever level we're doing
it but just that's such an important distinction too between but like Kim
but she says between letting letting it hover kind of all of this this
treasures hovering you know or this feast before us or someone's you know but
actually engaging letting it settle into our mind and heart we're actually taking
you know taking foot upon the path we've gotten all of our supplies and our
instructions and tips but then actually go ourselves
Oh, I see it's a young to me so soon so soon she took a margin in yes or did you
see a new gingy in she'll balance a lot of a cool new jolted roses on touching
Oh oh so steam checker namta janez in jacobha jr. Pune to jay to be lava so
jaju jang see God in the day don't do your char show kahira vehicle vision
comes to build on the one mother you wait janez he wants in jansa he's a big a
jay bada in Georgy own Swasti say one reason be made energy doing you do they
not sound or they're not sure you're gonna lose them gee by doing something
not on through they don't judge show by this merit may all obtain emissions
man to feed the enemy wrong doing from the stormy waves of birth old age
sickness and death from the ocean of samsara man free all beings a precious
body cheetah and those without it may be generated and then those who have it may
have never diminished but always continue increasing